# Security Engineer Intro

## Intro

Some questions for you:

- Why do we need security engineers?
- What do you need for becoming one?
- What do security engineers even do?

## What is a Security Engineer?

### Why do organizations need security?

Well, organizations have always had the need to protect their **physical assets**.
Now they need to protect their **digital assets** (or they wouldn't be able to lend the aid of modern tech).
Organizations do all of this (dedicate resources to security) to ensure their primary goal is achieved without hindrance.

### The role (What do they do?)

A security engineer is someone who, in relation to an organization:

- Owns the overall security (responsibility over digital assets/security posture).
- Ensures that risk is minimized at all times.
- Devises strategies and creates systems that minimize risk posed by threats.
- Periodically **runs tests** (to ensure robustness), **identifies weak points**, and **prepares mitigations**.
- Develops and implements secure network solutions.
- Architects/Engineers systems that are trustworthy, reliable, and secure.
- Collaborates and coordinates with other teams to stablish sec. protocols across the organization.

This is a loose definition, the actual job may vary. However, **a sec engineer is always someone who faces big security problems, breaks them into smaller chunks and then solves them**.


## Core Responsibilities of a Security Engineer

### Asset Management/Asset Inventory

**You need to maintain an inventory before you maintain security!**
You can only protect assets you know you have... Therefore, this asset inventory must not only exist but be **maintained** and **updated**, while including all required info.

### Security Policies

Policies are principles and strategies for an organization to maintain the security of its assets.

- They are needed to maintain security posture.
- They are based on Security Principles 
- They are then implemented organization-wide (following - the letter and spirit of the policies)
- Sometimes the need to grand an exception to these policies might arise. The Sec. Engineer evaluates by consulting the security principles either to grant or deny exceptions and suggest risk mitigation steps.

### Secure by Design

Provides the most Return of Investment (ROI).
Secure by design **means building security into products from the very beginning** (to treat it as a core feature, not an afterthought). Meaning that the engineer takes steps to implement, for example:

- Secure Network Architecture
- Organization hardening of: Linux, Window, Active Directory
- Software Development following the Secure Software Development LifeCycle.

### Security Assessment and Assurance

Understanding that security is hard work that requires continuous effort.
Therefore, a security engineer plans to conduct regular security assessments, audits and red-teaming and purple-teaming exercises to continuously improve the security posture.
> The sec. engineer does not necessarily conduct these by themselves. They rather help schedule, create RFQs and help with prioritization/implementation of findings.

## Continuous Improvement (Management) (This is also a responsibility)

As mentioned with sec. assessment, security is a continuous effort. The following steps help assure continuous improvement.

### Ensuring Awareness

Periodical awareness sessions help protecting against social engineering attacks or for specific teams to ensure they follow security principles related to their expertise.

### Risk Management

Risk = likelihood + impact;
to manage risk, the sec. engineer is tasked with:

1. Identifying security risks
2. Determining their likelihood and impact
3. Finding solutions to deal with the risk (minimize, avoid, accept, etc).

Choosing the way of dealing with the risk is a business decision! The sec. Engineer is like a trusted advisor.

### Change Management

Continuous change in organization's assets might introduce vulnerabilities (new features f.e.). Change management protects the security posture.

### Vulnerability Management

Monitoring vulnerabilities and planning to patch or minimize their risk.

### Compliance and Audits

Ensuring compliance with regulatory and organizational requirements. Sec. Engineers work closely with internal and external auditors.

## Additional Roles and Responsibilities

Since a security engineer's role is loosely defined, some additional responsibilities might need to be taken up.


### Managing Security Tooling

Provide input on tools to chose to decision-makers. Configure or fine-tune security tools such as SIEMs, Firewalls, WAFs, EDRs, and mor

### Tabletop Exercises

Often conducted to gauge the operational readiness of an organization from a security point of view (to be familiar with the organization's playbooks for instance).

### Disaster Recovery and Crisis Management

To maintain business continuity.

## Conclusion

Overall a Sec. Engineer:

- Owns the responsibility of an organization's cyber security
- Ensures systems and infrastructure are built securely
- Help maintain security posture
- Take on additional roles and responsibilities

